
Development notes for Article-Level Metrics

Goals:
- Install everything necessary to develop this application on the local machine
- Describe a process for deploying the application to production
- Use the ancillary tools provided for bulk data import and source updating

There's more "philosophy" in this document than in the INSTALL notes, partly to convey some of the reasoning behind Rails development methodology.

-- Development Setup

- Make sure you've got Ruby 1.8.6 or newer (though at the moment, 1.9 is too new); you can install and use Ruby Enterprise Edition for development if you prepend its path to your PATH (as described in the INSTALL notes).

- More on Rails environments: You're going to develop using the "development" environment; automated testing will use the "test" environment. These can run out of the same source tree, but "production" and/or "stage" environments would run out of their own trees.

- Each environment needs its own database, too, so set up a database for "development" and "test" environments, as described in INSTALL.

- Install all the gems listed in INSTALL, then this too:
sudo gem install ruby-debug

- Check out the application sources; a directory in your home directory is fine
svn co svn+ssh://cvsuser@svn.plos.org/alm/head ~/alm

- Set up config/database.yml as described in INSTALL, with (at least) development and test configured.

- Set up config/initializers/site_keys.rb too, also as described in INSTALL.

- Set up Starling and Workling, on the local machine, too, and start their daemons (either via /etc/init.d scripts or manually in a shell window). I don't think you need to do anything special if you're running two environments (other than "test") on the same machine - they can share a Starling, with each Workling running from its own application directory. Let me know if you're going to do this and I'll do more research.

- Start the "development" version of your application in Rails' own webserver: do "script/server" at a shell prompt when cd'd to the application's directory.

- Open a browser and visit http://localhost:3000/ -- you should see the main page of the application, and the shell window where "script/server" is running will show the server & database log.

- There's still a bit of setup required for an instance of the application: some of the sources need configuration. I've included the configuration options (passwords, etc) in a separate email message; I've also added a rake task for dumping source configurations from the database; see below. ("rake" is Ruby's "make": instead of Makefiles, there are Rakefiles written in Ruby syntax; do "rake -T" when cd'd to the application's directory to see what rake tasks are available; I've included a few custom ones for this project that are described below).

- You can enter DOIs manually by creating new articles, or you can bulk-import them using another rake task (see below). For now, I'd suggest configuring all the sources via the web interface, then adding a couple of DOIs that you know are popular -- this will mean that updating those articles from all the sources will be a lightweight operation.

There's more to explain about managing the application, but now that things are basically working, let's talk about application structure, request processing, and automated testing.

Rails application structure

A brief structure overview: Rails is strongly model-view-controller; each of these portions of the application lives in a subdirectory of the "app" directory. When a request is received, it's routed (using config/routes.rb) to an action of a controller. An action is just a method, and REST conventions in Rails mean that you'll see the same basic methods in most controllers: "index" gets a list of things, "show" shows one thing, "new" creates the form for a new thing, "create" processes the new form, etc.

The controller action collects data using models and stashes it in "local" variables; then, a view is rendered (and the view has access to the "local" variables through some Railsy magic). Often, Rails selects the view (usually a template in /app/views/some_controller/) automatically.

Let's follow a request through the controller & action that this application will most often see, an article-show request:

- User requests "http://plos.eliot.com/articles/info:doi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pcbi.0040020". Routing determines that this request should go to the articles_controller's "show" action. Routing also strips off URL parameters into a "params" hash that's available to the action; in this case, it's the DOI, which goes in an "id" parameter.

- "Filters" configured for this action, or all actions, are run. Filters can shortcut request processing: we use the login_required filter on some actions (though not this one) to ensure that the requesting user has logged in -- it redirects to the login action (RESTfully, that's /sessions/new) if the user hasn't. In this case, the detect_response_format filter strips off a ".xml" or ".json" from the DOI parameter; Rails would normally do this automatically, but not for us because we allow "." in DOIs.

- Finally, the show action is run. Its basic job is to load the article and use one of several views to render it, based on the request format. HTML requests will be rendered using the app/views/articles/show.html.erb template, implicitly; XML & JSON requests are rendered explicitly using model methods that conditionally augment or restrict the data included in the response. (If you're thinking that MVC would suggest that XML & JSON generation ought to be in the view layer, not the model layer, you're right; I've seen it done both ways, and this way was more expedient this time.)

A bit about Rails testing

Rails encourages test-driven development; there are built-in mechanisms (similar to JUnit or NUnit) that use reflection to locate tests to run. There are three flavors of testing that this mechanism supports: unit tests (which test model code on its own), functional tests (which test controller code, generally with model mechanisms stubbed or mocked out), and integration tests (which test views, ideally independently of the other two layers).

I've written unit and functional tests for most of the code I've written; on other projects, I don't normally write integration tests using the built-in mechanism because I find that they tend to be brittle, and I don't like the high cost of evolving the integration tests to match constantly-evolving views. On this project, I haven't written them because there hasn't been much view mechanism to verify, and it's mostly covered by the other tests. (On those other projects where view testing is more useful, I've been investigating Selenium, a test mechanism that runs in the browser to verify behavior - it's less brittle and also allows verification of browser-site AJAXy stuff.)

These automated unit & functional tests run in their own environment: just like there's "development" and "production", there's "test"; this allows the tests to create and destroy database objects at will. A rake task, "db:test:clone" is provided to make sure that the test database's structure matched your local development database.

All the unit and functional tests will be run if you do "rake test" at the command prompt (or just "rake" by itself: we're so test-centric that "test" is the default rake task).

Adding a source

A Source is a place where we can get statistics for an article. Each is implemented as its own subclass of the Source model class; the Source base class lives in app/models/source.rb, and each subclass lives in the app/models/sources/ directory.

Each source also has a single data row where its configuration is stored; the "sources" table holds these rows, and its schema provides columns for each configuration parameter that any source might need.

Each source has to implement the query(article) method, which takes an article and retrieves either
- A list of results, each of which is a hash. This hash must contain a :uri entry that's unique to that citation of that article as reported by that source; it can also contain other details (which we record and display in the web UI, but otherwise don't do anything with right now).
- A count of citations, just a number (Scopus does this).

There are a couple of helper methods I've written that minimize the amount of work you need to do to create a source, since most sources present their data in XML or JSON form: get_xml produces a parsed XML DOM object that the source can then query; get_json produces a parsed JSON structure.

So, for a new source, you'll generally want to copy an existing source that uses the same format (bloglines.rb uses XML, nature.rb uses JSON) and tweak it to produce the uri and whatever other details you want to save. Once you've done this, you'll need to visit the Sources list in the web application - you can configure the parameters used by the source and mark it "active" - this will create that data row.

The Rake Tasks

As I said, I've written several rake tasks in the course of development: they're all in lib/tasks/*.rake where they'll be found automatically:

in db_update.rake:
  rake db:update [SOURCE=name] [LIMIT=n] [LAZY=0] [VERBOSE=1] [RAISE_ON_ERROR=1]
    Update articles from sources. Options:
    LIMIT=n -- if specified and non-zero, will only update this many articles (the default, 0, means "do all")
    LAZY=0 -- if specified, will update non-stale sources
    SOURCE=name -- if specified, will only update from this source
    VERBOSE=1 -- noiser than usual
    RAISE_ON_ERROR=1 -- stop on first failure

  rake db:update:stale
    Same as db:update -- probably what you want if you just want to make sure things are current.

  rake db:update:all
    A shortcut for specifying LAZY=0 LIMIT=0 -- probably what you want if you don't trust existing stuff (or you've just changed the schema)

  rake db:update:cited
    Updates only articles that already have citations -- this was useful in development when I primarily wanted to test updates that would actually get me stuff.

  rake db:update:one DOI=10.1371/foo
    Updates a given article (which must already exist), non-lazily.

  rake db:update:reset
    Mark all articles as stale

  rake db:update:reset_all
    Actually discard all retrievals from all sources, and mark all articles as stale

in db_fetch.rake:
  rake db:fetch
    Drop and recreate the current database, dump the production database data (via ssh) and imports it locally. It then runs "migrate" and "db:test:clone" to make sure everything's up to date locally. (You'll need to change the ssh statement - it's got my server's name in it.)

in doi_import.rake:
  rake doi_import <DOI_DUMP
    Bulk-load a file consisting of DOIs, one per line. it'll ignore (but count) invalid ones and those that already exist in the database.

in fake_update.rake:
  rake db:update:fake [DOI=10.1371/whatever]
    Generate fake historical retrievals for a DOI, which probably shouldn't be a real one -- for development.

in source_config.rake:
  rake db:source_config
    Dump the configuration parameters for all configured sources. This is how I generated the dump in the separate email I sent you.

in wsdl_scopus.rake:
  rake wsdl:scopus
    Re-generate the Ruby code that handles Scopus; these files are then checked into subversion like the rest of the code. You'll need to do this again if Scopus changes their API...

